[dashboard] Configurable defaults + UI dialogs for py-spy/memray profiling params (#64806)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-observability/user-guides/profiling.md

If your dashboard is accessible over a network without authentication, enabling profiling exposes side-effecting endpoints to potential abuse. Enable {ref}`token authentication <token-auth>` when using profiling on an exposed dashboard.
:::

(profiling-defaults)=

> ### Configuring profiling defaults

Reviewer: **Heading level and placement.** This is an `###` under `## Enabling dashboard profiling`, which makes configuring defaults a subtask of enabling profiling. They read more like siblings to me: enabling is a security gate you pass once, configuring defaults is separate operator tuning, and this section sits right before `## CPU profiling`. Worth considering promoting it to `## Configuring profiling defaults`. Your call, and I can see the argument that both are head-node env vars so grouping them helps.

On the wording: the style guide asks for imperative task headings ("Configure profiling defaults"), but the H2 above it is a gerund, and internal consistency on the page wins over a global sweep. Leaving it as-is is fine.

Author: Keeping it at `###`. The defaults are inert until you pass the gate in the parent section: every profiling endpoint in `reporter_head.py` short-circuits with a 403 unless `RAY_DASHBOARD_ENABLE_PROFILING=1` (7 call sites). Nesting encodes that dependency, and it keeps a 10-row operator reference off the same level as the user-facing tool sections (`## CPU profiling`, `## Memory profiling`, `## GPU profiling`).

Also keeping the gerund heading, per your note about internal consistency with the H2 above it.

Reviewer: Your call stands, and the 403-gate argument is the one that settles it -- the defaults genuinely are inert until you clear the parent section, so the nesting is load-bearing rather than incidental. Promoting it would also put a 10-row operator reference at the same level as `## CPU profiling` and the other tool sections, which is the worse outcome. Leaving as is; this was non-blocking either way.

> Each profiling request (stack trace, CPU flame graph, memory profile) accepts several parameters. When a request omits a parameter, the value falls back to a cluster-wide default. Set these environment variables on the Ray head node to change the defaults for every request that doesn't specify the parameter explicitly (an explicit query parameter always takes precedence).

Reviewer: Two parenthetical asides in one paragraph, and the style guide asks you to restructure rather than parenthesize. Folding the first into the sentence and promoting the second to its own sentence also gives the table a cleaner "the following" lead-in:

```suggestion
Stack trace, CPU flame graph, and memory profile requests each accept several parameters. When a request omits a parameter, its value falls back to a cluster-wide default. Set the following environment variables on the Ray head node to change those defaults. An explicit query parameter always takes precedence.
```

Author: Applied verbatim.

```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1
:widths: 45 40 15

* - Environment variable
  - Meaning
  - Default
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_NATIVE_DEFAULT`

>   - Include native (C/C++) stack frames. Higher overhead; only takes effect on Linux.

Reviewer: Semicolon in prose. The style guide asks you to split instead:

```suggestion
  - Include native (C/C++) stack frames. Adds significant overhead. Only takes effect on Linux.
```

Separately, and this is the technical question from the review body rather than a style point: I don't think "only takes effect on Linux" is true for all three request types. `memory_profile` in `reporter_head.py` also defaults its `native` flag from this variable, and your comment on the `pyspy_native_supported` field says memray native is cross-platform and only py-spy is Linux-gated. If so, a reader who sets this to `1` on macOS gets no change to stack traces or CPU profiles but does get native frames in memory profiles, which this row tells them not to expect.

I've deliberately kept the suggestion above to the semicolon and left the Linux claim exactly as you wrote it, because you know the profiler behavior and I don't want to restyle a scope claim into something more confident than I can verify. If the split is real, something like "Only takes effect on Linux for stack trace and CPU profiling. memray honors it on every platform." would cover it.

Author: Applied the semicolon split, and you were right to flag the Linux claim -- it was wrong, so this one is a content fix rather than a restyle.

Verified in `profile_manager.py`: py-spy `dump` (L111) and `record` (L187) both guard with `if sys.platform == "linux" and native:`, but memray `attach_profiler` (L306) is a bare `if native:` and appends `--native` unconditionally. So exactly the reader you described -- someone setting this to `1` on macOS -- gets no change to stack traces or CPU profiles but does get native frames in memory profiles.

Landed as:

> Include native (C/C++) stack frames. Adds significant overhead. Only takes effect on Linux for stack traces and CPU profiling. Memory profiling honors it on every platform memray supports.

I used "every platform memray supports" rather than "every platform" because memray has no Windows build at all, so memory profiling doesn't run there to honor it in the first place.

  - `0`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_SUBPROCESSES_DEFAULT`
  - Also profile child processes of the target (stack trace and CPU profiling).
  - `0`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_IDLE_DEFAULT`

>   - Include off-CPU / sleeping threads (CPU profiling only).

Reviewer: The style guide asks you to spell out separators in prose, so `X / Y` becomes "X or Y":

```suggestion
  - Include off-CPU or sleeping threads (CPU profiling only).
```

Author: Applied verbatim.

  - `0`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_LEAKS_DEFAULT`
  - Report memory leaks instead of peak usage (memory profiling only).
  - `0`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_TRACE_PYTHON_ALLOCATORS_DEFAULT`
  - Record `pymalloc` allocations (memory profiling only).
  - `0`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_CPU_DURATION_DEFAULT`
  - Duration in seconds for CPU profiling (clamped to `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_MAX_DURATION_S`).
  - `5`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_MEMORY_DURATION_DEFAULT`
  - Duration in seconds for memory profiling (clamped to `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_MAX_DURATION_S`).
  - `10`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_MAX_DURATION_S`

>   - Maximum accepted profiling `duration` in seconds. A profile blocks the request for its whole duration, so it's capped rather than open-ended; raise or lower it per cluster. The minimum is always 1s. Explicit `duration` query values above this return HTTP 400.

Reviewer: This is the one cell doing four jobs, and it has a semicolon plus an abbreviated unit. Splitting it into sentences and spelling out the unit:

```suggestion
  - Maximum accepted profiling `duration` in seconds. A profile blocks the request for its whole duration, so Ray caps it rather than leaving it open-ended. Raise or lower it per cluster. The minimum is always 1 second. An explicit `duration` query value above this maximum returns HTTP 400.
```

I verified each claim in there against `_profiling_duration_cap`, `_clamp_profiling_duration`, and `_query_duration`, so this is a rewording only, not a change in meaning.

Author: Applied verbatim.

  - `60`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_CPU_FORMAT_DEFAULT`

>   - Output format for CPU profiling. One of `flamegraph`, `raw`, `speedscope`.

Reviewer: Small one: add the conjunction before the last item in each set, per the guide's Oxford comma rule.

```suggestion
  - Output format for CPU profiling. One of `flamegraph`, `raw`, or `speedscope`.
```

Author: Applied verbatim.

  - `flamegraph`
* - `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_MEMORY_FORMAT_DEFAULT`

>   - Output format for memory profiling. One of `flamegraph`, `table`.

Reviewer: Same here:

```suggestion
  - Output format for memory profiling. One of `flamegraph` or `table`.
```

Author: Applied verbatim.

  - `flamegraph`
```

> For example, to make native frames the default for stack traces across the cluster (Linux only), set `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_NATIVE_DEFAULT=1` on the head node. Because `native` significantly increases profiling overhead, prefer leaving it off and enabling it only when sampling the Python layer alone isn't enough.

Reviewer: Three things in this paragraph:

- "prefer leaving it off and enabling it only when" is hedged. The guide asks you to turn hedging into direct advice, so make it an instruction and give the reason.
- "(Linux only)" repeats the table row two lines above.
- The overhead warning now appears three times across this PR: this paragraph, the table's `native` row, and the new sentence in `debug-hangs.rst`. Once in the table plus once in the prose that a stack-trace reader actually lands on is enough.

```suggestion
For example, to make native frames the default for stack traces across the cluster, set `RAY_DASHBOARD_PROFILING_NATIVE_DEFAULT=1` on the head node. Enable it only when sampling the Python layer alone isn't enough, because native frames significantly increase profiling overhead.
```

Author: Applied verbatim.

One note on the third point, since I think your prose and your suggestion blocks disagree slightly. Each of the three suggestions still carries an overhead mention: the table row ("Adds significant overhead."), this paragraph ("because native frames significantly increase profiling overhead"), and `debug-hangs.rst` ("Native frames add significant profiling overhead"). I applied all three as written, so it now reads once per context -- table row as reference, this paragraph as operator guidance, `debug-hangs.rst` as the path a stack-trace reader actually lands on. If you meant to trim to two, say the word and I'll drop the clause here, since this is the one an operator reaches only after reading the table.

Reviewer: Keep all three. You're right that my prose and my suggestions disagreed, and the suggestions were the correct half. Line 51 is a table cell someone scans, line 82 is guidance for an operator setting the env var, and `debug-hangs.rst` is a separate page a stack-trace reader lands on without seeing either. That's three contexts, not three repetitions. Nothing to trim.
